- Most data in the world can be plotted as a normal distribution which looks like a bell-curve. - Mean of a population in a normal distribution is at its peak. - Most of the data (68%) in the population lie within one standard deviation from the mean. - 95 % of data lie within two standard deviations from the mean and 99% of data lie within three standard deviation from the mean. - Sampling distribution is the distribution created when we plot means of 1000s of samples with a fixed sampling size. - Mean of a sampling distribution is the same as the mean of the population. - Standard deviation of the sampling distribution (also called standard error of the mean) = standard deviation of the sampling distribution / sqrt (sampling size).
Rita Prasad is a principal of a school. The school has 10000 students across Grades 1 to 12. The school students performed not so well in the recent math test in their half-yearly exams. Here is the Math score for all the students in the exam. <Student Activity 1>
We can plot the distribution data. - We can calculate the mean and standard deviation for the data.
Student imports plotly.figure_factory as ff. - The student imports pandas as pd. - Student imports csv. - The student uses pandas to read the csv file. - Converts the data into list and saves in a data variable. - Using plotly.figure_factory plots the d
https://github.com/whitehatjr/z-test/blob/master/main.py
Let's look at the sampling distribution again. Our 100 students sample could be anywhere on this distribution. It could be on the right of the mean or it could be on the left of the mean. We know that: 68% of data lie between one standard deviation from the mean. If the new sample mean lies within one standard deviation, we can say that not much might have changed because of the intervention. In statistics, we say that the change has not been significant. 95% of data lie between two standard deviations from the mean. If the sample mean lies beyond two standard deviations from the mean, we can say that there must have been a significant change because of the intervention.
99% of data lie between three standard deviations from the mean. If the sample mean lies even beyond the three standard deviations from the mean, it is highly probable that the intervention has an impact. If the intervention has been positive, the mean would lie to the right. If the intervention has been negative, the mean would lie to the left.
Let us draw a traceline to mark one standard deviation, two standard deviation and three standard deviation in the figure.
One way to find the impact of an intervention is by plotting the mean and comparing how many standard deviation away from the mean is the new sample mean by guesstimating
Another way to do is by mathematically calculating it: - Find the difference between the mean and the new sample mean: Sampling Distribution Mean - New sample mean - Calculate how many standard deviations away is the new sample mean from the sampling distribution mean:
(New Sample Mean - Sampling Distribution Mean) / standard deviation This is also called z-score.
If z > 3 or z > 2 ; the new sample mean lies more than 3 standard deviations away from the sampling distribution mean. It also means that there has been a large impact of the
intervention. We say that the change in math score is statistically significant. If z < 1 or z < 2; the impact of the intervention might not be statistically significant.
z-score tells how many standard deviations away is the new sample mean from the sampling distribution mean.
This example was really important because it helped us identify which intervention worked best on different population sets. This type of testing to identify the impact of interventions is used by governments, financial institutions and non-profits to understand what works best with a population